Main Idea: Blackout Alarm

Problem: Blackouts in Ukraine, temporary loss of power/electiricty in a household, and inability to track these losses.
  
A system, wherein a user would have a microcomputer (most commonly Raspberry Pi) connected to power, through a Ups, with a reader connected to read off if power is present.
The readings would be tkaen each minute, and stored in a database.
A dynamically updating website would be hosted, which would offer the user a visual display of the data concerning if the power is present, with minute wise, hour wise and day wise breakdowns.
Alternatively, option to choose the dates they are interested in themselves is also given.

2.1 Investigating the project problem
  Interview with 
  Date of Interview: /06/2025
  Place of Interview: Online
  Q1 - "Describe what is a blackout is and how prevalent of a problem that is for Ukrainians currently"
    "A blackout is a power outage for a household in Ukraine, due to how energetical infrastructure is damaged due to targeted attacks and bombings. Sometimes there are planned blackouts, where you are told the time you will have no electircity in your household upfront, and those are done to lessen the strain on the infrastructure. However they can still drag on for longer than expected, and at times of attacks there are still spontaneous blackouts."
  Q2 - "How long can blackouts be?"
    "Planned blackouts are usually no more than a few hours, but as I mentioned, they can drag on for longer than we are told, and the spontaneous blackouts really have no upper limit, it depends on how severe the attack was and if an electrical station was damaged"
  Q3 - "Do you see a benefit in tracking blackouts?"
    "It definetely has a use, yes. It would be great for example to have for properties you might not live constantly in, or for example to have an option to track if power is present for your older relatives, and/or in rural ares, to be able to check in with them. It would be also great if there are devices whcih require constnat supply of electricity, like fridges, freezers or even medical equipment."
  Q4 - "What kind of devices would be avaliable for use in the project?"
    "In general, you can expect a Ukrainians hosehold to have some kind of Personal Computer or Laptop, but no guaranteees that it will be powerful. Any kind of affrodable device, like a microcomputer, or an esaily assemblable circuit could work."
  Q5 - "What way of receiving data about blackouts would be useful? Would you like to receive SMS/EMail notifications?"
    "SMS or Email I'm afraid would be to cloggy for me, I find that website that can notify you in real time, as well as giving a breakdown of statistics would be the best and most useful - easily acessible from everywhere(phone/laptop), would give a better overtime understanding and compatible with every OS"


2.2 Decribing problem to be solved.

Currently the idea is sending a reading (1 for power is present, 0 for power is absent) to a database, which stores all readings.
From there, a website would be set up do display visualisations of the data.

What am I going to use as a device to track blackouts?
One way is ot use a microcomputer with input output pins.
By connecting IO pins to a relay, and relay then to a usb cable, that could be connected to wall socket through an adapter - by reading if power is present we will be able ot take a reading.
Since Arduino microcomputers have limited capabilities, we would need to use a separate computer/laptop to update a database.
The benefits are:
Add-on would be small, and therefore affordable 
Compact
Drawbacks:
Intrusive to the personal computer, as codeneeded to run would have to be put in personal files.
Virtual machine could mitigate that, but that would make troubleshooting harder, add a level of complexity, make it less intuitive to set up and take too much resources.
If the user were to take their laptop somewhere, the tracking would stop.
If the user isn't home, that would mean that the main laptop/computer would have to stay turned on constantly
These drawbacks are significant, but the idea with IO pins has value, as well as being one of the best impelementations of power tracking.
Another way would be using a full power microcomputer with IO pins, such as Raspberry Pi
Raspberry Pi microcomputers are the ones which fit the best, the most recognisable, and as such easy to acquire, while being affordable.
This would mitigate the drawbacks previous idea had completely, while stil being considerably compact.
While being more expensive than a small arduino board, it would save money on power draw (in comparison to having a full-power computer run in addition to arduino)





2.3 Modelling the problem or the existing system.

  Interview with EV, a Ukrainian Computer Science student
  Date of Interview: /07/2025
  Place of Interview: Online
  After laying out the idea behind the project, I have asked EV, as a possible end user a number of questions
  Q1 - "You own and use on a constant basis a Raspberry Pi microcomputer, could you see utilising it in this project as well?"
    "Yes. I would like the usage to be as unobtrusive as possible. I would also like for both the setup and implementation to be as homogenous as possible, as I could see it being beneficial that code for the project could run on any version of Raspberry PI."
  Q2 - "Given a website, where you are given a breakdown of when power was absent, how would you like this data to be presented?"
    "A by minute tracker would be great, and it would be great to see how much in an hour, or a day power was absent. It would also be great to be able to set custom dates , between which I could see when power was not present, say if I wasn't howe for a week, or 5 days, and see when power was absent."
  At this point EV asked me how I would go about actually reading if power is present or not. I explained to EV that I was planning to take readings through the GPIO pins, connected to a relay module, from which a cable going to USB-A connector, which could then be connected to a regular wall socket via an adapter.
  "So if I already use a pin which you wanted to use, how would that work?" -EV
  "There are alternate pins, and it's unlikely you are using all of them" - Myself
  "Well that means that you can't hardcode them into your program" 
  An astute observation, which I'll have to account for.
  Another concern that EV has raised is that the additional parts need to be easily procurable and accessible, with best case scenario not involving soldering
  I will take keep this in mind, as this means that I wouldn't be able to use a pre made solution, as well as making sure that assembly is intuitive.
  Q3 - "What would you want to see from the website the data would be displayed on?"
    "I would want it to update in real time, showing on the website, for example, if the power is absent right now. Dynamic content would be great, but I'm sure you can understand, I would want my data to be as up to date as possible, not just waiting for me to update"
  Q4 - "Obviously, I'm going to be using a database to store data readings. Do you have any comments on how it should be done?"
    "First of all, obviously SQL won't cut it, it would just be wasteful, and there is not many tables with connections we would need ot create. Secondly, you might want to look into hosting an online database, since hosting your own physcially would require a lot of effort, in terms of keeping back ups of data, making sure that the database is also powered on constantly and increases in latency. The issue with power, you know, being the biggest problem"

Using self-hosted databses vs An Online database

Type of database to be used

Presenting breakdown of information on the website

Setting up Rapsberry Pi to work in a way that the code is isolated from anything else user might use




Target audience - Ukrainian users, who wish to be able to track when blackouts are happenning as a means of gathering data, tracking presence of power on an estate they don't currently live on, or to able to take care of devices which require constant power supply (e.g. servers, fridges). Assume they possess a reasonable understanding of computers.
Aims and objectives of the current system - Recording readings on a Raspberry Pi on if the power is present, Uploading them to an online hosted database
  
